Godfrey AI text
Trained on
https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/godfrey-reggio-godfrey-reggio-interview
https://www.conversations.org/story.php?sid=91
https://www.filmcomment.com/blog/interview-godfrey-reggio/
http://www.satyamag.com/aug03/reggio.html
https://thegreatnorthernfestival.com/tgn-blog/life-out-of-balance

Response: Well, I think for all of us there’s a line, even though it’s quite crooked, that gives, as it were, some testament to who we are and what we do. In my case, I grew up in a very stratified society of New Orleans. At the age of 13/14, I decided to throw in the towel, that it was all too crazy, not so interesting. I was getting burnt out. At a young age, living in the fat as it were, I decided to go away and become a monk. So I left home. My parents were not too excited about that, and I stayed out for 14 years, having taken final vows as a Christian brother. In effect, got to live in the middle ages during the 1950s and learned crazy things, like the meaning of life is to give, not to receive, that we should be in the world but not of it. All these things I think, certainly influenced me. I’m very grateful for that highly disciplined, very rugged way of life, that would make the marine corp look like the boy scouts. So I think that had a big influence on me. During the course of that time, I saw a film called Los Olvidados (The Forgotten One) by Luis Bunuel, so The Young and the Damned, the first film he made in Mexico after being kicked out of Franco Spain. It was so moving to me that it was the equivalent of a spiritual experience. I was at that time working with street gangs. This film was about the street gangs in Mexico City, I was working with street gangs in Northern New Mexico. It moved me to the quick: it wasn’t entertainment, it was something that was an event that touched me and hundreds and hundreds of gang members that saw it. We bought a 16mm copy and I guess I’ve seen the film a couple hundred times. So that motivated me to look towards film as a medium of direct action. Now, film is usually not seen as that. I don’t see it as entertainment in my case, I hope it can be a vehicle for direct action. That’s how I became involved, it was also during that time that I had the good fortune to meet Ivan Illich, Illich was a priest at that time, I don’t know if you know who Illich is.
Response: Ok, he’s just passed away by the way, December the 2nd. So I had the good fortune to become a confidant of his, at a young age I used to do my religious retreats in Mexico at his think tank. Got a great appreciation for, I guess, being sensitive to different points of view about what could be done for social change. His point of view was much more radical than, say, the radical left of the country, which was anti-war, pro-social justice, and included a good dose of socialism or communism. His radicalism was way beyond that; it was much more fundamental. It had to do with the very nature of society and institutions (not just who controls them, which is kind of the communist mantra). So I had the opportunity to be in the presence of a great teacher who was also a great activist. So I think those things impelled me to the position I’m in now.
Response: Yes I do, now let’s talk a little bit about his critique. This was a man who was not accepted by either the organized religions of his day or the Left of France. He was persona non grata from the Left and the Right, much like Wilhelm Reich was persona non grata of the Left and Right of Germany. Here was a man who, more than any single individual, has contributed to our understanding of the nature of technology not as something we use but as something we live. For Jacques Ellul, technology is the new and comprehensive host of life, the new environment of life. The problem with that statement is that our language hasn’t caught up to the profundity of the thought, our language has become assumptive and no longer, in my opinion, describes the world in which we live. Ellul bore great criticism, if not persecution, for his ideas, from the Left as well as the Right, because like Ivan Illich, who made statements like “Freedom is the ability to say ‘no’ to technological necessity”, Jacques Ellul described our greatest act of freedom as to know that which controls our behavior. So both of these men were on very similar tracts, both of them were way outside the sphere of organized Right and Left, both of them were way to the Left of the Left. His ideas on the environment, you could call them Christian, but I wouldn’t. Certainly he was a theologian and he wrote many books on the word of god from his own point of view, but his stuff can certainly stand. His book for example, The Technological Society, his first book, 1949 I think it was really written and released here sometime in the mid 50s, that book is a solid philosophical, sociological text about the nature of technique. It’s light years beyond anything being written now. I think, if I’m not mistaken, the University of California at Berkeley has acquired the rights to his full library, all of his notes, his books, and they have in there a great gem.
Response: Street gangs for many years, as a brother. I became convinced that, while there are a few loonies that probably would hurt anybody under any condition, most people are good. I believe that; it’s my experience that most people are good, it’s not something I believe, it’s something I know. If you tell somebody they’re a shit, they’ll probably behave like a shit. If you tell somebody they’re great, they might achieve greatness. I think that’s the fragility of who we are. We live in a world not of this or that but this and that. So after working with street gangs for quite a long time, I realized that the context in which people of poverty have to try to work out how to live in this society is very cruel. I didn’t start this project to set up an institution that would live forever. It was a response to an immediate situation, and I left to pursue film as a form of direct action. Now by that I mean the following; since people are at the public trough of cinema, either through television or in the theater itself, I felt, what better place to put another idea out? Not in the form of language, but in the form of image and music. Let me explain that it’s not for lack of love for the language that my films have no words. It’s because of my, I guess, tragic thought that our language no longer describes the world in which we live. Through Ivan Illich, I had the good fortune to meet Paulo Freire, in Brazil, in São Paulo, before he passed on. I had a good time talking with him about this enormous book that he wrote, The Pedagogy of the Oppressed. In that, he says that the single most important thing a person can do is to begin to rename the world in which they live. This was his form of literacy, not teaching one how to read a book in the traditional sense, but to rename the world, because when you name something, you in effect create it. My own thought is that our language is bound with antique ideas, old formulas that no longer describe the moment in which we are. Therefore, that statement, A picture is worth a thousand words, I tried to take it and turn it on its head, and tried to give you a thousand pictures that can offer the power of one word. In the case of each of the three films, Koyaanisqatsi, Powaqqatsi, Naqoyqatsi, words that come from an illiterate source, a primal source, a wisdom that is beyond our ability to describe the world. A wisdom that says that all things we call normal are abnormal, all things that we call sane are insane. Now I realize that this is a pretty intense point of view, but that’s the point of view I ended up with from my own experience, not from academia but from being on the line in the ‘60s, trying to see the world from another point of view.
Response: Well, you know, it’s hard to say that. I wouldn’t want to exempt myself from anything, all of money is dirty money. Whether I got my money from an angel, and I don’t know how you get your money but it’s as dirty as the money I got. The events that I’m talking about are way beyond capitalism and communism (which is its flipside). Both of those ‘isms are much closer together than most people believe. They both share the same point of view about the instrumentality of life, the mass society, the industrialization of society, their only difference is who controls it. In the case of capitalists, it’s individuals who have accumulated wealth on the backs and the injustice of millions of people, literally. In the case of the soviets, it’s a new class of administrators, bureaucrats, who created a class, in my opinion, just as ironclad and unjust as the capitalist class. Both really want the same thing; they are just concerned about who controls the means of production. My question is not who controls the means of production, but the nature of production, as such. The question is not whether or not workers have an equitable pay and a healthy work environment, which is the interest of organized labor, or the Left that works with organized labor. The question, more profoundly, is, what is the effect of the automobile on society and should we have that in the first place? So, we’re dealing more with fundamental questions. It has become my experience, sadly, that human beings become their environment. We become what we see, what we hear, what we taste, what we touch. Anything that we do without question, in an altered state, we become that environment. If the environment that we live in today, as Ellul says, is a technological milieu or environment, if we no longer live with nature, and I’m not parenthetically talking about going back to teepees and caves etc, if our environment itself is technological, if we don’t use technology, if we live it, breathe it like the air that is ubiquitous around us, then we become that environment. In that sense, whether you’re communist, capitalist, socialist, primitive, an outsider, an artist, a revolutionary, if you live in this world, all of us doing that, we become this world. In that sense, all of us now are cyborged. Cyborg is not something for the future, it is already here. We live now in both worlds. The old world, the world that “nature” replaced, old nature, held its unity through the mystery of diversity. So there are many languages, many different environments to live in, there’s tropical, there’s semi-tropical, there’s mountain, there’s desert, there’s savannah, there’s salva, etc There’s not one flower, there’s uncountable flowers. Not one animal, a zillion of them, not one human being, many. The mantra of the old world was, Divided we stand. The new world, the technological order, holds its unity through a technological imperative. It creates unity through technological homogenization. Its mantra is United we stand. To me, this is the moment we’re in. We’re at that crossroads and the world is becoming homogenized; what we’re seeing is the Los Angelization of the planet through technology. My work has been, in effect, to try to shield my eyes from the blinding light of the new sun, technology, seeking the darkness, walking towards the positive value of negation. Trying to question the very structures, the very contexts in which we live, not who controls them. We become what we see, what we hear, what we taste, what we smell, it’s so easily said but it’s a profound concept beyond the simplicity of the words that bear it. We live in an environment, as Ellul said, that is, in terms of a social event, the most enormous event of the last 5,000 years has gone unnoticed, the transitioning of old nature to new nature. Environmentalists don’t get it, most of environmentalism is how to make this madness safe. How to make cars safe, how to make industry safe, how to make electricity and war safe for the environment. We live in a time where we are like blind people, we don’t see the moment in which we are. We no longer use metaphor as our means of communion or communication (ie language). Metamorphosis is the form now, where the transformation, where the substance of something is changed, the transubstantiation of something is a metamorphic approach to communion rather than the metaphoric, which is the power of language. But language is disappearing. At the beginning of the 20th century, there were over 30,000 languages and principal dialects in the world. Today, with many more people, over double the number of people that were present then, we’re approaching 4,000 languages and principal dialects. In other words, as the earth is being eaten up by the voracious appetite of technology, everything that is local is disappearing. In that disappearance, language disappears and when language disappears, we are left with a more homogenized language to describe the world which, again, does not give us access to understanding. It produces more conformity.
Response: I don’t believe, I think it’s a pure myth, right, left, upsidedown, backward, to think that we control technology. I think that’s a joke. Technology is in the driver’s seat. I would go to the very radical writing of Mary Shelley, not the Hollywood version, but her original book Frankenstein, where we’ve empowered something that’s not in the organic realm, we’ve organized and allowed it to exist, and now it has its own life form. Now, that’s very hard for us to get our mind around, because we give ourselves more credit than we’re due. We think that our greatest attribute is our mind, actually our greatest attribute is what is our action, our act, what we do everyday. It’s what we’ve become. Marx has this great adage, I think Marx says, “Is it the behavior we have that determines our consciousness or is it the consciousness that we have that determines our behavior?” And of course the answer for 8 out of 7 people is that it’s the behavior that we involve ourselves in that determines our consciousness. The only way to avoid that is to do what Joseph Brodsky did, to become an outsider to society, all of us have to live in this world but we don’t have to be of it. Brodsky decided not to be of it. He became, for me, a revolutionary poet, though he’s not seen that way in the communist world. Stood outside, answered Marx’s questions. He said consciousness, or removing oneself, being in the world but not of it, would be a way of having your mind determine your behavior. So, the thing that I’m railing against, technology, is something I use. Some would say this is hypocritical or contradictory, let me agree with them, that it is contradictory. In the sense I’m trying to communicate, and wishing to do so in the contradiction of a mass culture, then I have to consciously adopt the tools of that culture or the language of that culture in order to communicate. So it’s the equivalent of fighting fire with fire. In that sense, I see the work that I do as direct action. Though I certainly use a very high-tech base, using that in order to make it available to raise questions about the very thing I’m using.
Response: Well I grew up in urban civilization, in New Orleans, then I came out to New Mexico which is one of the highest deserts in the world. Here, the sky... you don’t look at, you breathe it. I’ve lived here now 44 years, I consider myself fortunate to be out here, it’s like the Siberia of America. In this magnificent beauty is this enormous enigma, and the evil demon of nuclear technology that sits, as the crow flies, about fourteen miles from my window. So it’s a place of inscrutable beauty and unbelievable demonic energy. I’m sure that’s had an influence on me, being here, breathing the sky and having the presence of this monster. It allows me to have another point of view of the world in which I lived. When I shot Koyaanisqatsi with my collaborators, the way we did this film was eliminate all the foreground of what is a normal theatrical film, the plot, the characterization, the acting etc When you don’t have the foreground, what’s left is the second unit or background to the story. Stripping the film of all that foreground material, we take the background or second unit, and make that the foreground. So, in this case, the building becomes like an entity, the traffic becomes like an entity, something that has a life of itself. The whole purpose of this film was to try to see the ordinary, that which, let’s say, we are basted in. Being marinated in the environment that we live in, it all seems very familiar. And I was trying to show that that very thing that we call familiar is itself a techno-fascistic way of living. So I tried to see it from another point of view, I tried to see it as a life-form, albeit a non-organic life-form, that has a life absolutely independent of our own. Right now, the cities are made for the automobile, not for the people. When the automobile was brought in as a technology, they said it would just be a “faster horse,” it wouldn’t have any more effect than that. But we all know that’s ridiculous, we all know that we pay a hidden price for our pursuit of technological happiness and we call it, instead of war, we call it accident. But more people die in vehicular crashes than they do in war, if that’s even believable. So, it’s just the price we’re willing to pay for the pursuit of our technological happiness, and these films are about questioning that point of view.
Response: My answer would be simply, yes. The whole point of view of Powaqqatsi is that through the dogma/religion of progress and development, which again, parenthetically, is not only a capitalist agenda but also a Marxist agenda that very paradigm consumes, and eats, and pulls out of the sockets people who live a handmade life. I was criticized when I made that film by Leftists in Germany, for romanticizing poverty, for trying to eliminate industrialization and, therefore, a better way of living. Well that’s in a point of view, if that’s how they see it, so be it, but that’s certainly not my intention. My intention was to say that standards of living are ephemeral. The standard of living of the world is based on first world norms, of consumption, of the institutionalization of life, of giving up your own control to the control of others. The very opposite is true in the so-called third world or Southern hemisphere, where really, the heritage of the earth exists not only in nature but in human development. Small, convivial, decentralized societies of handmade living, where things can be uniquely different, valley to valley, plain to plain. The world that we’re trying to force, through the IMF, etc, on the southern hemisphere, is a world of homogenized value. A world where Los Angeles, Jakarta, Hong Kong, the Philippines, etc, all look the same. This is in diametric opposition to the nature of the development of the South, which is disappearing right now because of the norms of development. The very founding, for example, of the United Nations, was on the dogma, on the theology, on the philosophy of promoting progress and development around the world as our guarantee for world peace. Now what crazier thought could you have? All of us buy in, in some way. Many people buy into the United Nations, but their very purpose is to produce this homogenizing event all over the world. For me this is the essence of techno-fascism, and it’s another example of how the Northern hemisphere is consuming, without question, the Southern hemisphere. The Northern hemisphere has consumed most of its own resources already, the Southern hemisphere is where the nature bank of our world still exists. If the north has its way, that will be consumed to create and further develop the technological order, which for me, is a fascistic venture.
Response: Here’s the thing, these films, early on, were conceived. It took years to realize them, but the idea was that Koyaanisqatsi would deal with the northern hemisphere (or in your terms, the first world). The hyper-industrial grids that we call societies. The second film deals with the southern hemisphere or what you might call the third world. Societies of simplicity, where unity is held through the mystery of diversity and how those societies are being consumed by the myth of progress and development. The third film, conceived early on as well, dealt with the globalized moment in which we live. How the world is being homogenized, how unity is being held together by the new divine, the computer. The new divine is the manufactured image, which is the subject of Naqoyqatsi and hence, the necessity of using digital technology to create it. In the case of Koyaanisqatsi and Powaqqatsi, we went to real locations to film them. In the case of Naqoyqatsi, we went to virtual locations to film them. We took stock and archival images that venerated familiar those things we have all grown up with through the myth of history, and we’ve taken and revivified them, or tortured them with a computer to create a manufactured image which is, as Baudrillard would call it, the evil demon of image. The purpose of image is to produce this monstrous, demonic conformity. Right now, image is more important than truth or reality. Look at the political spectrum, it’s all about the image of something. So this third film deals squarely with the image as its principal subject matter, the manufactured image in the globalization of the world. We spoke a bit about the computer, because it plays a central role as an entity in Naqoyqatsi. From my point of view, the computer is the new divine. When I say that, it portends supernatural powers. The computer is not just something we use again, it’s the very vehicle that’s remaking the world to its own image or likeness. If one were a Christian theologian or a Catholic theologian, the highest form of magic in the Catholic universe is the sacrament. The sacrament is different from a sign in that it produces what it signifies. Unlike a sign, like if one is married and wears a ring, that ring is a sign of your fidelity, of your union with your spouse. But it doesn’t produce it, it only reminds you or others that you’re married. In the case of a sacrament, the sacrament produces what it signifies. So if there was a sacrament of unity, it produces that unity, it’s the very highest form of magic. So I’m saying that the computer is the new sacramental magic, it produces what it signifies, it remakes the world to its own image and likeness. In that sense it is the very driving force of what I would call the techno-fascistic world. As the swastika was the image of fascism in the 20th century, and there were many other images as well but that one prevailed, the new image of techno-fascism is the blue planet. Not the reality of the earth, but the image of the blue planet. That, to me, is the ubiquitous image of techno-fascism.
Response: Well, first of all, let me say that if there’s a course of action that someone would recommend that would be right for anyone, that very rightness for everyone would make it fascistic. So anything universal for me is fascistic. I don’t pretend to have the answers, but I know that the question is the mother of the answer. Rather than presenting answers to people which I think is a fascist modus operandi, it’s much more important to present questions. The question becomes the mother of the answer. That which can change things more fundamentally than anything is the power of a community example. The power of a community in direct action or living an alternative. I’m not talking about utopias, I’m talking about a community in struggle, that wishes to present an alternative to the slavery to which we’ve all subjected ourselves through mass society. That would be a way out. If you look at it from a more comprehensive point of view, perhaps there is no exit from technology. This is, itself, a tragedy. On the other hand, I believe that there is no destiny that human beings cannot overcome. How that is done is up to the individual, it’s not up for any of us to give answers to others as to how to remake their world.
Response: Well first of all let me say that I’m not a Hopi devotee, I don’t spend time over there. All of my contacts have died there. This film is not about Hopi, I am not trying to go back to a Hopi way of life, nor am I espousing that. We can’t go back to the teepee, we can’t go back to the cave. What I tried to do is simply take their point of view, because I found it laden with wisdom, I found that they understood our world better than we did. That doesn’t have to be the result of guilt, it has to be the result of coming in contact with someone that blows your mind with their perspicacity of thought. That’s what happened to me. It was music to my ears to hear David Menongue, an elder who was in his late 90s when I met him, say that everything that white people call normal we look at as abnormal. Everything white people call sane we look at as insane. Well that was music to my ears because that was exactly how I felt, they didn’t give me this idea, it was like confirmation. If you have a way-out idea and it’s so way-out that you think you might be nuts, which I thought for years, if you find some other people that actually have that same idea in another form, it confirms you. So I used it as a confirming. I also felt that their language has no cultural baggage, when you say Koyaanisqatsi, no one knows what that means, it sounds like, perhaps, a Japanese word. I’m taking that language, that doesn’t come from a literate form, it actually comes from an illiterate form, it’s a culture of morality. I’m taking the wisdom of that point of view to describe our world. Much like academics do in universities, they take their own subjective categories of intellectual pursuit and apply them to Indians through ethnographic studies, anthropology, etc. This is turning the tables, it’s taking the subjective content, or ideas, of Hopi, and applying it to white civilization. And that’s something that makes some people uncomfortable. That’s an easy way of getting out of seeing the value of other people’s cultures and contributions beyond your own.
Response: No, if it’s burnt out, it’s only because it’s been used so often. My whole thing in Naqoyqatsi was to take all of these burnt out images, images that we’re surrounded with, like the wallpaper of life which we call history, that great lie as it were, and re-examine those, put them in another context. So this film was a little more difficult than the other two, it’s taking our familiar, that which we’ve seen ad nauseam, and trying to put it in another context. Nuclear is something that, while we think we know something about, we have no idea of what it’s done to us. Much like television, something as ubiquitous as television, we have no idea of what it’s doing to us. Because we keep looking at it from the point of view of the subject matter that’s on the tube, rather than the technology, which is a cathode ray gun aimed directly at the viewer that probably changes our genetic structure and certainly puts us into a deep comatose state. I made a film called Evidence of Children Watching Television (and they were watching Dumbo actually, or they could have been watching anything, it didn’t really matter). Their eyes become fixated, their breathing slows down, automaticities take place on the face, slobbering comes out of the mouth; these kids are on drugs heavier than Prozac just by having the television on. It’s the same thing with nuclear technology, we think it’s just something that we control, that if we had a “Nuclear Test-ban” treaty, everything would be fine. The nuclear war has already occurred, all during the 50s. We doubled the background radiation of the planet, it’s affected all of our genetic structures. So, while these things have the familiarity of the surface image, the profundity of their depth is something that we know very little about. I think it’s Einstein that said that the fish would be the last to know water, I would say, taking off on that context, that human beings will be the last to know technology, because it’s the very water we live in.
Response: I don’t like to give advice, but I’ll say what I think as to what we can do. I think our greatest opportunity is to live a creative life. Often that means to reject schooling, rejecting organized education. For many of us, our diploma from college becomes our death certificate, because it ingratiates us into a way of life that’s unquestioned where the principal modus operandi is finance, or money. The real meaning of life, I think for all of us, in our different ways, is the opportunity to live a creative life, to create things, to name things. I would say for all of us, the most radical thing we can do, and the most practical thing we can do, is to be idealistic, to rename the world in which we live. I think we do that best through example, not just through using words, but using words that we can stand on, the acts that we do. Living in the world but not being of the world, being an outsider, yet knowing that all of us are insiders. Living with the conundrum that life is not this or that, life is this and that. It’s not black or white, it’s black and white. So I’ll add to that whole recipe humor, and one has the possibility of living a meaningful life.
Response: Very much. I’m sure more than even I’m aware of. I was not a religious person. I don’t think I’ve ever been, actually. I was born and grew up in New Orleans and was living a very fast life at the age of eleven, twelve and thirteen. I mean it was so intense I felt that it was almost over with at that point. But I was being taught by Christian Brothers and I noticed how generous and joyful they were and I got inspired, like many young adolescents, by the adults in my life. There was a generosity and kind of an otherworldliness that was almost childlike, which was very attractive to me. So I wanted to be like them. And they said, well, we’re looking for vocations, and you can join the Brothers. I asked my parents about it and they were very upset, because I was not a particularly religious person, far from it, but my father, thank God, said if he wants to do that, then we should let him do it. I feel that was very wise on his part. I had no idea what I was getting into, coming from a very fast life in New Orleans to a religious, self-sustaining community of 130 monks in Lafayette, Louisiana. But the founder said it doesn’t matter how you got to the order, the important thing is that you got there. Of course, I wanted to take it seriously, and I did. I stayed for fourteen years. I made temporary vows, final vows; I was a lifer. I was expecting to do this forever, but I was asked to leave my order in 1968. I knew for years that it was coming because I was a pain in the ass of my superiors. My Che Guevara, as it were, was a man called Giovanni Roncalli, John the 23rd, Pontiff of the Catholic Church in the late fifties, early sixties. His reign more or less paralleled Kennedy’s time. He didn’t ask to be Pope, nor was he even interested, but they offered it to him. He said “accept nothing, question everything, even the structure of the Church.” For me this was most important because I felt the structure was in the way of the spirit. So to have a Pope say that, and I belonged to a Pontifical order—not under the Bishop or the Archbishop, but under the Pope—that was like having God tell you to go out there and, not raise hell exactly, but to really allow yourself to question things. So I was asked to leave my order in 1968. I had become a mouthpiece for some of the younger monks in the order. It was after Vatican II. All the church was in a process of renovation. We wanted—I did and other young brothers—we wanted to question the role we were playing in the modern world based on the directions of our founder Jean-Baptiste de la Salle. The Brothers take five vows: poverty, chastity, obedience and then each order has its own unique vows; we took two: stability in the institute, which means to be faithful to your vows, and teaching the poor gratuitously. Now, although the high school I was assigned to had fantastic kids and I was excited about teaching there, I lived in a community in which a third to almost 40% of the population lived in dire poverty. These people had no access to our school except for a few scholarships, which were offered to the poor. I felt the whole purpose of our order was to offer something to these people who had no access. In fact, the founder of our order was the first person in Europe to teach in the vernacular. Up until that point, only people who had money or who were part of the gentry went to school, and everything was conducted in Latin. Jean-Baptiste de la Salle taught in French in his country and from that practice, unleashed through the order he founded, education changed all over the western world.
Response: Yes. And with myself, most particularly. Repression played a very large part in my formation. I ended up for several years washing my hands eighty, one hundred times, a day. My hands were in a constant state of bleeding for years from being—in the religious order, they called it scrupulosity. In clinical terms, it would be called crazy! When you repress your emotions, they have to pop out some way. I was repressing tremendously, and it popped out in a zillion neurotic ways.
Response: Well, I knew it was going to happen, but the difference between knowing it intellectually and having to live completely on your own outside of community is extraordinary. When I took my final vows at twenty-five, I asked my father confessor, should I take the vows? I told him I knew I was marked for being on the way out, but he said, “That’s not your decision, Godfrey. If you want to take your vows, you take your vows” and, remarkably, I got okayed to take my final vows. I never regretted joining the Brothers, nor did I ever regret leaving the Brothers. So I feel like it was a remarkable opportunity for me to, in effect, live in the Middle Ages and not grow up in contemporary America. To learn that the most practical thing in life is to be idealistic is an enormous gift. I have nothing but complete admiration for the Christian Brothers and for what they taught me. It has stayed with me.
Response: I was saying that because I left home so early and really only saw my parents for three weeks out of a year. It was just an extraordinary opportunity for an American kid. The church doesn’t do that now because of homosexuality and abuse and madness, but I still feel it’s an extraordinarily period of time for young people to be able to make those kinds of choices. We ask nothing of young people today, whereas I was asked to be heroic. That was very meaningful to me. As far as living in the Middle Ages, I’ll use a reference to Joseph Brodsky, the expatriate from the old Soviet Union. He was an American poet laureate in 1991, I think. I’m a big, big fan of his poetry and books, and especially his essays, one in particular Less Than One which begins with his explanation of the great conundrum of Marx: is it your mind that determines your behavior or your behavior that determines your mind? Brodsky knew that for most people, clearly, it’s our behavior that determines the content of our mind, because we’re creatures of habituation. So Brodsky’s brilliant insight on how to change one’s mind is to change one’s behavior, and his response to that conundrum of Marx’s was to step outside of the world and yet be in it. That echoes, of course, Christ’s statements of being in the world, but not of the world—very meaningful to me. So I’m referring to the Middle Ages in that sense, of being outside of contemporary American life. What I learned is that it’s what I did every day that determined what I was going to think. I’ve never forgotten that. Every now and then I’ll give a convocation address at a university and I try to always caution the students to not let their diplomas become their death certificates. If you give up your imagination, if you give up your ability to create for the wages of a good job, then you might give up that which predicates us as human beings, the ability to create our own lives. So I felt that stepping out of this world, yet being in it would be a way of achieving some relative degree of freedom. I’ve tried to live that way and I’m grateful to the church for that experience.
Response: I’ll give you an anecdote. I was in Albuquerque in the early 90s and the Dalai Lama was at the university of New Mexico giving a talk. The place was packed. He’d just finished giving his talk and said he’d take questions. A woman jumped up and asked, “Your Holiness, what is the single most important thing that I could give attention to?” Without even a thought, he answered, “Routine.” Now I understood that immediately. In my order, the rule, or routine, was the highest order of attention, that is, being attentive to what one did every day—because what we do is what we become. It’s not just what’s in our minds. That’s an illusion. Our minds are a very small part of who we are. Although we consider our brain our largest organ, it’s vastly humiliated when compared to our behavior.
Response: Exactly. In Sanskrit there’s a word ekagrata, which means one-pointedness. Let’s give it a free form translation. It means the ability to focus on something. That ability to focus unrelentingly is what gives one the ability to walk on water, move mountains and do things that are beyond our wildest imagination. But that’s not something we learn. It’s something we have to struggle to acquire. We’re going to have to go upstream to do that. In my case, I look at it as commitment. Once you commit yourself, everything changes; everything comes to you. There’s that great quote attributed to Goethe: “Whatever you can do, or think you can do, do it!” Boldness has genius in it. We’re capable, literally, of extraordinary things, being very ordinary people.
Response: I feel so. I feel my life and the life of the people I’ve associated with, my colleagues now of almost thirty-six years—we’ve created our own lives rather than getting caught in the web of wage labor. It doesn’t mean you don’t need money. I want to do a film right now, but I don’t have any money to do it. But I’m not going to find it through wage labor.
Response: The elders that I knew are all dead now. I was not a Hopi devotee and my films have nothing to do with the Hopi way of life, but I thought I would take the clarity, insight and perspicacity of their language as it approaches our world. I think we see the world through language, and that it is language that determines our human qua human status. That’s why I said earlier that one can be free if one can say that one can be free.
Response: No. It’s not. I’m not talking about a superficial saying. But when one can act “as if” one is free, then you are free. There’s Nietzsche’s beautiful statement, “Act as if you know what you’re doing.” When you get down to it, it’s really the condition we all face. What we know is extremely limited compared to what we don’t know, and most enormities in life are unknowable. So to act as if one knows what one is doing is very important. I had to do that in making this film. I’d never gone to film school. I just had the intestinal fortitude to say “I know what I’m doing.” I acted as if I did, and all things came to me. Now I had to know the power of my own limits, too, and my limits are severe. I’m not in any way a technical person, and I don’t use a computer, not for ideological reasons, but because I’m so obsessive; I think I’ll get sucked right into it like a vortex. But it’s certainly the way I made these films. I had to work through the eyes and ears of other people, and hence the collaborative forms. I’m assembling a whole group of artists that can come together, not just to do my bidding, but to make a vital contribution, which means to go beyond what I can offer them and create something that I could never bring to the film. Hence Ron Fricke’s cinematography, Phillip Glass’ music, Jon Kane’s visual design, Alan Walpole’s editing—I mean, without those guys, these are films way beyond my capacity. So, while I have to be at once an assassin and a mother, and keep the clarity of my own conversation going, I’m certainly willing to live in a critical forum. All of us who work on the project have enormous egos, mine included, but to have vanity of ego would kill the creative process because it’s a critical forum.
Response: I don’t know how to say this. That’s why I love this kind of dialogic arrangement. I find that in the very act of speaking, I’m hearing myself say things for the first time. I don’t know. I often feel like I’m a medium for something that I have no right to have. I’m not saying I feel guilty, but I feel that something is speaking through me. I’m not saying that I’m hearing voices from the home office, please. I’m just saying that it’s nothing I acquired, nothing by virtue of my capacity. It’s something that has happened with me. I can feel things and I want to give articulation to them.
Response: I met these elders through a friend who wrote a little book called A Day of Purification with an elder. He said, you know Godfrey, after everything you’ve told me about what you want your film to be, you should really take a look at this. You should speak to David Monongya, who was Hopi leader. So I got to meet David through this man. At that time he was in his late eighties, a very vital man. He said something like, “Everything you white people call ‘normal’ we call abnormal. Everything you call ‘sane’ we call insane.” It was liberating to hear someone articulate that, because I truly felt I was on the verge of going nuts. I couldn’t understand the insanity of the world, the lack of concern. I’d been working with street gangs for so long, and I just couldn’t understand our inhumanity towards each other. And when I heard David say that, it struck a chord; I felt a confirmation. While the films, as I said, are not about the Hopi, it’s taking the clarity of their language and applying it to our world. So I took consciously this Napoleonic dictum that a picture is worth a thousand words and flipped it around. I wanted to create a thousand pictures that could offer us the power of one word, in this case koyaanisqatsi. As I said before, because I think we see the world through language, I was especially not interested in going to a “civilized” language. I went to an illiterate culture, a culture of orality, a culture of speech, a culture of tradition and I was privileged to see the world, albeit in a very limited way, through the eyes of these several Hopis: David Monongya  James Kuchanga and Michael Owatewama. Then I also worked with a German scholar, Ekkehart Malotki who had mastered the Hopi language. I described what I wanted the film to be and they said, “Gee, here’s the word.” It was almost lost in the Hopi vocabulary. David Monongya agreed. He said that koyaanisqatsi would be a beautiful word for my film. So with his imprimatur, I felt like I had a theological affirmation of what I was saying. It was explained to me that the term qatsi means “life.” In its compound form, qatsi means “way of life.” In fact, the Hopi language is so rich it can really make our language limp when it comes to explanations for things. This term meant “crazy life, life out of balance, life in turmoil, a way of life that calls for another way of living.” I’m sure there are many other meanings, but since I was presenting this to white people, not Hopis, I used a dictionary form. The word koyaanisqatsi has never been spelled in Hopi because they don’t spell. They don’t have a written language. So I had a transliteration by Ekkehart. And after about two years into the project, the idea of a trilogy came up through Phillip who said that things go best in threes. If you notice on my hand, I have three lines; I put this on everything I do. It’s been with me since I was a kid. I can’t explain it.
Response: Exactly. Three is my number. I mean, I’m not saying that in a New Age way; it was more of an intuitive thing: so a trilogy. The second film, Powaqqatsi—powaqa is where the word powaq comes from. A powaqa is a black magician, a dark energy. They make a distinction between white magic and black magic. The M.O. of a powaqa is that it consumes the life force of another person in order to further its own, and it operates through seduction and allurement. I thought what better word to describe the relationship between Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere societies? In effect, the word powaqqatsi means predation. It means eating the life of another person.
Response: Right. And once you know it, it’s too late. Taking that word and giving it an application to the modern world we live in, it’s the neo-liberal dictums of progress and development, the World Bank, science and technology. This idea of progress and development becomes the powaqa. It makes promises—“you’re going to get a higher standard of living.” That’s all predicated on numbers and the things you have. Do you have a refrigerator? Do you have an education? Do you have access to health care? Because of my teaching on Illich, I look upon all those institutions as radical monopolies.
Response: Ivan Illich is like my brother. I mean that. He certainly changed my life. We had a very, very close personal relationship, especially in his later years, but all the way through. I met him in 1963. It was so exciting to meet a man of such insight and articulation. He challenged everything that I held while speaking to my feelings in such an articulated way. I couldn’t get enough of Illich. Fantastic! Lee is a saint! He is such a brilliant guy. He dedicated himself to Illich. He’s a friend of mine.
Response: Everything I’m talking about comes from my own experience. Certainly, I’m not trying to invent the wheel; I pick up things from other teachers, Jacques Ellul or Leopold Kohr. But my M.O. as it were, is more intuitive. I feel these things. Unless you can feel something, you really can’t say it. What gives you authorization for articulation, if it’s not just rhetoric, is a deep feeling. It comes out of something. I’m not trying, in any way, to be academic about it, though I love teaching. This is beyond that. This is something that I’ve felt and I’ve struggled to find the language to express.
Response: Well, following up on what you’re saying, which I think I understand very well, I used myself as the subject for my films. All these things that I’m talking about I can see and feel in myself. I become the environment I’m brought up in and so I have the ability, as any human does, if I wish to, to reflect on my own condition. So I’ve been the basis of my films. I don’t say that in any glorious way. I say it just to be honest. I’m basing it on my own experience of the world. I’m not saying it’s the right experience, or that it’s The Truth, but I don’t want to be offering the audience a fraud. I know that film is so powerful that one can question the probity of free will in the presence of this electronic fire. We have the extraordinary examples of propaganda that came with the motion picture camera. We have the Soviet Union, Germany, Italy, France, England, the United States. The effect of propaganda on people is enormous. The very word “documentary” shares its etymology with the word “docile.” And we are very docile beings. We’re loaded with fragility. This is also our beauty, but we’re highly suggestible, especially in the crowd, and we’re sort of living in the crowd by virtue of the mass society that we’re part of.
Response: No. I’m not. But I will give you an anecdote. Someone who was very significant in my starting all of this was Jerry Mander. He wrote this incredible book The Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television. He also wrote a book called In the Absence of the Sacred. He came out of an advertisement background and started Public Media Center here in town. I came to seek him out before I did any films here in San Francisco. And with Ron Fricke, my colleague on Koyaanisqatsi, I did a multimedia saturation campaign using television, billboards, radio, newspapers, lectures for one month. I wanted to use advertisement because people are irrevocably hooked to it. You can’t escape it. It’s like the wallpaper we live in. I wanted to take something and advertise nothing, have no tags on it. They told me you can’t advertise something without a tag on it. It’s against FCC regulations. So I made tags so small that they couldn’t be seen.
Response: You have to give attribution to who is doing the advertising, to who is saying this. But I came to see Jerry Mande first to get his insight. He was so encouraging, so enthusiastic, that it was contagious. I just loved the guy. I don’t want to say that we worship different gods, but we’ve taken different paths.
Response: You know, as you’re talking I’m thinking of the "king of the hobos." I never forgot this. He said, “It’s not important to be important. It’s important to be.” This is, I think, what you’re saying. I would say it another way. To be is to fly the flag of one’s own shadow. I don’t mean to be glib about that, but that’s what I tried to tell students who are graduating, “don’t let your diploma be your death certificate.” It’s endemic for all of us to get caught into mass ways of living, yet we have the gift of life. There is no limitation on that other than the real power of limit, and limits give us power. It’s like isometrics. If I didn’t put a schedule for the making of the film, I could still be making Koyaanisqatsi. So I think we can be whatever we believe we can be. We don’t have to be the models of what is offered to us by the left, by the right, by society. We have the ability to be unique, because originality is who each one of us is. That’s our vocation.
Response: Yes. Because nobody teaches you to be an individual. Education could be much more dynamic and interesting. It should be something where people could create things that have never been seen or heard before. We’re here as creators. We’re really toolmakers, homo faber, as well as homo sapiens. We become what we do.
Response: By working with street gangs. I worked with street gangs for just over ten years. I realized that if you tell a kid that he’s a shit, he’ll become a shit. If you tell a kid that he’s great, most of them will become great. If you give them a little love, if you offer them another structure in which to find themselves, if you ask them to give rather than to receive, if you ask them to be heroic, basically, then everything is possible! I experienced that working with street gangs, people who others had thrown the book away on—their families, the school system, the court system. These were people who were on the streets, pachucos—people who were headed to the pinta, the penitentiary. I realized that most of them were fantastic. Sure there are a few people who are messed up, psychotic, if you want, or who have a social pathology. Most people just didn’t have a chance, and if you give people a chance, there’s no end of possibility. But after working in gangs for that long, I burnt myself out, severely. I had to leave. I realized I was spinning my wheels. It was an unending cycle of poverty that generates this. So I wanted to speak to that condition, you’ll have to excuse me, in a metaphysical way, in a spiritual way, in a way that encompasses politics, because I started as an activist, an ultra-leftist, if you want. But I realized that most of that was aimed at who controls society rather than the structure of society, and that interested me very little. It motivated me to create film and that was terrifying to me because it was something I’d never done.  But I knew that film is like the new religion. I sit around in coffee shops and what are people talking about? Half of the time, movies! Movies are on everyone’s mind, but movies are taking you out of life rather than bringing you into it. It’s an entertainment form. We can entertain ourselves to death now, by doing nothing. I thought, gee whiz, that’s where everybody is. If I could only make a movie, the movie I had inside of myself. It was unspecified in the clarity of each shot, but I knew, for example, that I wanted to show the world as a living entity, as something alive with its own life force. In the early 60s I had the good fortune to see Luis Bunuel’s film Los Olvidados (The Forgotten Ones). Brother Alexis Gonzales brought it to me and said, “Godfrey, you should really check this out for what you’re doing. It will blow your mind.” I said okay, and I saw it. I showed it to some of the members of a street gang I was working with, some of the young men and women, and it became, for all of us, a spiritual experience. It was touching us, not entertaining us. So this film, I guess I’ve seen it two hundred times. It became our ritual. We all looked at it many times. It motivated me. As a young brother, you don’t see movies, no Hollywood movies. The Lady of Lourdes maybe, every four months or so. But to see Bunuel’s film, it was like I had received a shock from heaven, or a lightning bolt! It shook me to the core.
Response: It was so strong. I never related to the term “art” or “artist.” I live in a very artsy-fartsy community, very precious, Santa Fe, so I have an almost a knee-jerk reaction to the term, although a lot of my friends create what we call art. I felt that shock and awe, if it has a place at all, it is in the realm of art. Art, like religion, portends the divine. It portends inspiration. It is made, not for oneself, but to connect, to commune with other people. I felt that in Bunuel’s film. I felt touched by this man, albeit through a medium of technology.
Response: Oh, beautiful! That’s what I was trying to say earlier. If you can’t feel something, you can’t give word to it. Please, it’s not anything I take credit for, but I grew up as a sensitive person, and I might say, quite a stupid one, also. I lived in New Orleans where racism was a way of life. It still is. I could never understand it—kids growing up with quote “nigger” jokes. I love my family, please understand me, but I grew up in a racist family. And, at least in my mind, I couldn’t understand this. What is this all about? We’re sitting in a church and all these beautiful people have to sit on a bench in the back! Or they have to sit in the back of the streetcar. I never could get my head around it, and if I had not had the audacity or the imprudence to leave home at thirteen, fourteen, I would have never gotten out of it. You have to kind of step out of your world to have a shot at not becoming a carbon copy of the world you live in. So, for me, it was a magnificent stroke of fortune that I, without knowing what I was doing, stepped out of life and entered another world completely.
Response: It wasn’t a monastic order. I was in a religious community, what’s called an apostolic order, with not only a religious life, but also a work to do in the world. In our case it was to teach the poor gratuitously. The Christian Brothers. When I went in, it was a pretty strict order.
Response: I felt it was something I could grab onto, because it moved me so much. I was never interested in having a film career. I made a tactical choice of film. I don’t want to deal with cameras or editing machines. I deal in the realm of feeling, and try to give voice to it.
Response: Oh, yes. All of that is my idea, and also that it would be image and music. That’s what I mean. Those are the things that I do. I mean, when I announced to my crew that Phillip Glass was the composer I absolutely wanted, there wasn’t a person in the group who thought it was a good idea. They thought he was the master of the broken needle. I won’t name the folks, because they’re my dearest friends. They said, “But Godfrey, Phillip Glass, it’s just this repetitive stuff. You could have Beethoven, Mozart, Chopin—the Greats of All Time! And I said, well, I don’t know these guys, and they’re dead. And I just love Phillip’s music! It moves me. I said that he could write an original composition, and that I’d be able to talk to him! He’d come up with inspiration, and that’s been the basis of our collaboration. When the film was finished, there wasn’t a person in the crew who thought the film would ever be seen. I was doing the film in Venice, California. My friends thought I’d gone off the deep end, was cracking up—seven years on a project that was going nowhere. And I brought it to Santa Fe, and its first showing was at our major theatre, the Lensic. Two thousand showed up! The theater held eight hundred. They had to have additional showings. And the place went ballistic. My crew was so happy and, of course, I was, too. I’d kept my confidence for this film. I believed in it, and I knew it had to be made with a consummate level of technique if it were to have any chance in the world. I was willing to take on the contradiction of using technology to criticize technology. That got me a lot of early criticism. Many people didn’t give me money because they thought that was hypocritical.
Response: Oh, yes. I’m getting goose bumps as you say it, Richard. It comes from Cairo. That little girl is a member of a Coptic Christian community, which is a minority in Cairo and discriminated against heavily. These people live at the dump in Cairo. They’re extremely poor. They come out from the dump at about three or four in the morning to start making their rounds through the city. Of course, they don’t have motorized vehicles. Kids at the age of eight are already adults there. They have to take care of their siblings, or work. That particular kid was with her father. They were coming back at about two in the afternoon after having been out since four in the morning picking up garbage. Allen, one of the producers and an assistant director, came back one day very excited. He said, “Gee, Godfrey, we saw this incredible event today. We couldn’t get it, but if we go back there tomorrow, I’m positive we can get it!” And that’s what I mean about collaboration. He went with Graham Berry and set up and got this kid, who was beating this donkey because the horns were blowing all around her. She wasn’t being cruel; it was what she needed to do to move to the side of the traffic. Her father looked dead, but he was sleeping from exhaustion.
Response: No, that’s a very searing image. It’s kind of a stopper. When I saw that (when we were making that film, we’d carry portable projectors with us and we’d look at the dailies once a week), and when all of us saw it, some of us were just moved to tears. It just took us down. It’s not that it just has one message. It has a kind of multi-verse of possibilities. It speaks to many people.
Response: What has become Visitors went through a series of progressions. I started the process in 2003, just after Naqoyqatsi, but it was seven-plus years before there was any funding for the film. My first thought was a film called The Border. I had become interested in working with Butoh theater, especially with the emotive expression of human faces, but I couldn’t get the amount of funding I needed to make the film. The Border transformed into Savage Eden. An image of two-and-a-half primates in a pew came to me. I did a whole scenario for Savage Eden. It dealt with “isms”: scratch the surface and there’s an “ism” within us all. It was to be an anarchic, comedic piece dealing with the ideology of books, flags, walls, and screens… Then in 2005 Katrina happened. Being from New Orleans, this affected me deeply; a lot of what’s in Visitors is a result of Katrina. I went down to Louisiana to see the debacle, which enforced my idea of Savage Eden, but then I took it into another direction, which I called Evidence. Again, I couldn’t get anything more than a documentary amount of money—about a million dollars. I know it sounds ridiculous to refuse so much money, but I knew how to budget what I wanted to do, and I didn’t want to shoot a doc. At the time, other people were doing docs about Katrina (I’d seen Spike Lee’s When the Levees Broke). I visited Louisiana a lot during the four years after the hurricane, and I noticed that while what I had first seen was the evidence of an enormous storm, a catastrophe, as the places I was visiting sat there and moldered over several years this evidence became like a big set for the ruins of modernity, a modern Pompeii. This gradual transformation revealed something that I could not have seen had I taken the money just after the hurricane. holy see was the working title of Visitors throughout most of the making of the film, but my feeling is: “When in doubt, cut it out.” While I loved holy see as a title, I didn’t want it to get confused with the Vatican or be too obtuse or misunderstood. For me that phrase was like “Holy smoke!” “Holy shit!” “Holy moly!”—“Holy see!” To see is what Visitors is about—to see that which the eye cannot see, to make the invisible visible, to see that which is hidden in plain sight.
Response: Well, in all my projects, I keep him informed—when I’d go to New York, I’d usually sleep on his kitchen floor and we’d talk. He’s been involved in Visitors since 2003. We began shooting Visitors in New Orleans and the Louisiana swamps during the autumn of 2010. I asked Philip to come down with one of his producers to join us on the locations. Philip likes to experience firsthand what the camera will see. He was also at the Bronx Zoo when we first shot the gorillas—that was very moving to him, I think. He also came to the studio where we were shooting the people who were playing video games, watching TV. By coming to the locations, he gets an original hit, a connection to the project. I always ask Philip not to write a note until he’s really marinated in the ethos of the film, in its emotive atmosphere. He came and saw all the film selects (we shot over 630,000 feet for Visitors) and talked with us about creating a dance of music and image. Normally when composers work on theatrical films, they do musical cues that can be anywhere from fifteen seconds to a few minutes at most. Here, we were asking for a full orchestral score: in effect, a narrative for the film, an emotive armchair in which to view the images. That process takes time. Philip’s first writings were beautiful, but they were too symphonic and tended to overwhelm the images. He understood our feedback—and started over. At one point he had a Eureka moment and said: “What you’re asking me to do is write for the attention of the audience; I get it.” He went back to his studio and we got two pieces of music in less than a week, and they were spot on. Philip’s activity in terms of writing and then recording the score took about six months.
Response: Those portraits were what I call “from the inside-out”; the people were consciously sitting for portraits. All my effort involves getting organized in the hope that spontaneity is going to take over. And it does, usually. As a crew we discovered the virtue of an inhumanly slow move into the face so that the face you see at the beginning of the shot is not the face you see at the end. After the finger-play section and the beginning of the Six Flags movement, which is called “Off Planet/Games,” we go to a little girl who’s singing, then to another little girl who has the longest single shot in the film, then to four children each watching television, followed by the Big Clown face at Six Flags, then to a whole other series of portraits of young people who are playing video games. All of these young people knew they were being filmed, but they were asked to do what they normally did when they played these games. As soon as that digital screen came on, it was like a tractor beam; each person went out of a self-conscious state and became entranced by the virulent presence and demands of the game. We could record that entrancement by filming directly through the mirror that was reflecting the video game screen.  You don’t see the screen they were actually paying attention to, which was bounced onto a two way mirror that we could shoot through. I had used that technique for a little film called Evidence [95] that I did in Rome. And Errol Morris uses his version of it for his interviews. It’s used on television all the time.
Response: In the order I was in, each brother takes five vows, one of which is teaching the poor gratuitously. As a young person I was seized by this idea of social justice and I wanted very much to follow my vow of teaching the poor gratuitously. I was told that was not practical or feasible, because how would we run our schools, etc.? But being idealistic, my activities became a problem for my superiors. During the course of this time—the 60s—I worked with street gangs, and I saw this great film by Luis Buñuel called Los Olvidados, “The Forgotten Ones” or “The Young and the Damned.” This was purely spiritual inspiration. I guess I’ve seen it 150 times or more because it was constantly requested by gang members—I remarked to myself that I and so many others could be so moved by [it]. That motivated me to look into cinema in an entirely different kind of way.Response: Having been an educator for so many years I know that all a good teacher can do is set a context, raise questions or enter into a kind of a dialogic relationship with their students. I’ve made these films deliberately wrapped in ambiguity. I hope they ascend to the level of art. The power of art is its mystery—the meaning is in the eye of the beholder. So when I make a film I think of it as a “trilectic” relationship of image, music, and the viewer. If there are a hundred people that see this film in a theater at any given time, then there could be a hundred different points of view about it. Let’s say if I somehow had “The Truth,” and it was applicable to everyone, the very act of giving it to everyone would, for me, be a fascistic act. It is very easy to make clear what you want a film to say, but I did not wish to engage in overt propaganda, even for the right cause. I wanted to create an experience through the films, something where people could have the freedom of their own response to them. So, not for lack of love of language, but because I feel our language is in an enormous state of humiliation, I decided to make films without words. Now having said that, I’ve taken the famous dictum, “a picture’s worth a thousand words,” and turned it completely upside down. I try to offer the viewer a thousand pictures to give them the power of one word; in this case from an inscrutable, uncivilized and illiterate language, Hopi, which I think has more wisdom in it than our own language, which has lost its ability to describe the world in which we live. I’ve chosen words like koyaanisqatsi, powaqqatsi and naqoyqatsi so that I could use their subjective categories to look at the white people’s world or “civilized” world. In my case, I’m trying to look at this world as if an alien appeared and was trying to make some visual if not emotive sense out of what they encounter. Response: It was right after the Watergate hearings started. My colleagues [and I] felt that was just the tip of the iceberg, that in fact all Americans had dossiers kept on them by credit agencies and government agencies; and that the technologies developed for the moon [landing] and Vietnam were translated into technology used to control behavior or to put surveillance on the population. The motto of that campaign, which was done in 1974, was “Ten Years and Counting”—we were anticipating of course Orwell’s 1984. What we experience now was already solidly in place during that time, it’s just that people didn’t have much attention for it. Now, it’s inescapable. It’s lamentable that people accept it as the price we pay for the pursuit of our technological happiness. Response: The main focus of the Qatsi Trilogy, which has been the focus of my work over the last 27 years, has been Technology (with a big T because, from my point of view, technology is probably the most misunderstood subject in the world). Einstein said “I think the fish will be the last to know water.” I don’t think it would take much stretch of the imagination to say that the modern citizen will be the last to know technology, the reason being that it’s no longer something we use, but something we live. The popular myth of neutrality, that technology is “neutral” and it’s the use or misuse of it that determines its value, I think is woefully inadequate. Modern technology was devised, I guess, as a buffer from the ravages of nature, which is at once beautiful and horrible. But instead, it separated us completely from nature to the point that now technology is our new nature—instead of anima mundi, it’s techno mundi. Mystery is gone to the certainty of technological principles. So the real terror, the real aggression against life comes in the form of the pursuit of our technological happiness. For me, these things are unsayable because they’re so present that we don’t have any distance from which to observe. The problems of social inequity, of war, of environmental devastation, are the ongoing and logical conclusions of a way of life unexamined. So to hope to be able to have peace, to be able to have justice and environmental balance, are consequences of our behavior, not just our intentions. I think it’s naïve to pray for world peace if we’re not going to change the form in which we live. Response: I strongly believe that our world is our range of relationships, and I believe more in direct experience or direct action as opposed to more generalized committees and international forums. Nothing changes the world more conclusively than the shining light of a good example, and what we can do in our own lives is only limited by the imaginations that we have. We’re all capable of walking on water, of moving mountains—if not literally, certainly metaphorically—by the actions we take. I try to shield myself from the blinding light, the new sun of technology, [instead] seeking the darkness and ambiguity of a formless world out of which a new form can be created. In that sense, I think the most practical thing we can do is be idealistic.Response: To tell someone what to do with it is for me counterproductive. I don’t believe that you can tell anyone what the truth is. As enormous as the challenges are, I think they ring clearly the fundamental dialectic of life, where life is full of contradiction. Life is not as simple as this or that, good or evil. Life is this and that. Life is good and evil. It is up to the individual to sort that out. Hope can be the uncreated feature, what is the opportunity for each living person.So what can people do? As long as people are alive, they have the possibility to be heroic. To me, the nature of being heroic is to have the courage to be hopeless about this world order in order to be hopeful about something else. I’m not a hopeless person by any means. But I am hopeless about this nonhuman order, this technological grid, this pax numericana that all of us live under. To resist that, to rebel against it—the ability to say No is what’s most important.The greatest tragedy is inertia—the velocity most of us are on. It takes courage to move ourselves off of that line of inertia. This is something for each person, to act outside of necessity, outside of destiny—to act in that dark mucky world of risk, defiance, rebellion. This is not a class for beginners. Life is for those that wish to live, and to do so is to deal with the enormity of the moment in which we live. And that’s where our actions, based on our words, can have the most impact. Response: I learned that there are an enormous number of people that feel what I’ve just been talking about, but somehow do not have the words or the ability to describe to themselves what’s happening. As a result, we’re all walking around, myself included, in an altered state. But I trust that deeper level of instinct. Many people can sense that something is woefully out of balance in the world in which we live. That is encouraging to me. Our finest moment is when we know that which determines our behavior, when we know that which is oppressing us. That’s our freest moment, as contradictory as that might sound. Response: No. I think I used it more as a metaphor. It’s like the grand Roman candle on the cake—one grand event that we all point to as one of the singular accomplishments of the technological age. I think we’ve gone to space to conquer it. We’ve gone to space with the idea of raw material and resource to consume for the way of life that we live. We’ve gone for war and for industry. I don’t think we’ve gone to space for truth or for love, or for anything relating to human value. Everything that we put into space then becomes redoubled into the fabric of the way we live; the same thing was true for the Vietnam war, certainly for the Gulf wars—all of these advances of technology, principally, come out of R & D labs for military and corporate research. These are things that have to do with control and markets, where people are nothing more than numbers; and it translates back into our society as “progress [and] development.” And we’re laying that mantra or religion of progress and development on countless souls, billions of people around the southern hemisphere, and this is at war with their very creative, handmade way of life. Response: Well, they’re being slaughtered. Not just for our tables, but from their very existence. In the last several hundred years, ‘progress and development’ as a way of life has had a bigger impact on the planet than when meteorites hit the planet and eliminated the dinosaurs. It’s a tragedy that’s unspeakable. The same thing has happened with our oceans, with our water, with the very air we breathe. There is no more wilderness—I think that’s a romantic idea. That sounds pretty terrible. But having said that, I do believe that long after we’re gone, the earth will certainly be here and the animals or other variances that come from evolution will repopulate the earth through this inscrutable process of chance and necessity. For those that relate to evolution (which I don’t completely), one of the principal laws is the law of limit. When a species lives outside of its capacity, then it’s asking to go extinct. The supernova is brightest at the moment of extinction—I would say we’re in a state of supernova right now. The whole world is having to deal with this species that’s only been here for several million years at the most, and we could be flaming out right now. That would be an enormous relief to the creatures we share this planet with because we’re literally eating it up without any concern for the sanctity of life.
Response: These films were not designed to be mental. These are non-mental experiences because of the humiliation of our word. And the word is how we see the world. In that sense, these films are offering you a way to receive the world in which you live. To give voice to something that’s not voiceable, that our language doesn’t describe. I think we’re all mentally ill in that the bicameral mind was created. We have a cameral mind. We’re animals. The bicameral mind produced consciousness. My films question normality or consciousness. So all the notations of the films, its form, or its aesthetics, are spoken to the non-conscious world. Like in dreams, you do not hear words spoken. You see visions given. If you’re an ascetic, it’s called contemplation. So I tried to create, with Philip Glass, an opportunity to see what the language doesn’t any longer communicate. 
Response: In fact, what you’re saying was once the criticism of the film, and was once, for me, its value. I’m not advocating for anyone to do anything. Certainly not white powders. Not that which is concentrated, like if you take uranium and you make it into a bomb, or if you take the coca leaf and make it into cocaine. So for each film in the Qatsi trilogy, I’ve assigned them a drug that represents the world: Powaqqatsi is marijuana and hashish; Naqoyqatsi is full out ecstasy, LSD, all the psychedelics; Koyaanisqatsi, the drug is cocaine, amphetamines, speed. We’re on speed, on drugs, outrunning the future. That’s what Koyaanisqatsi is about. It begins and ends with that vortex. 
Response: My sacrament of choice since I was a young Christian Brother was marijuana, and still is to this very moment! I do feel the holy smoke has enormous medicinal effects. For me it’s sacramental, it’s not a recreational drug. My body is encrusted with it because it allows me to re-see in another perspective the world I live in. So it’s my normal state in an abnormal world. Have I tried all the other drugs? Yes. Sometimes in great excess. I have used cocaine to write with—it inspired me. I liked the rush. But I can’t maintain. And my nose starts to fall off my face and I start to bleed. I can’t breathe and I’m up at 4 in the morning and feeling vacant and “who the fuck am I?” and “what’s going on?” 
Response: Every morning I get here at 5 in the morning, wake up at 4 usually. The crew stumbles in around 9. We ring the bell at 10. We all assemble. Figure out our day’s work. And I’m here in the morning having holy communion. Getting all pumped up at the day. 
Response: It gives me clarity. I’m not addicted to it. But cigarettes are addictive, let me tell you. Now, I’m 974 months old, okay? I’ve been smoking tobacco since I was 12 years old. I had to stop when I was a Brother and then pilfered—my sin—a little mission money to buy cigarettes that I would smoke behind the gym. But since I’ve been out in the street, I’ve been smoking. So if I’m gone and I don’t have a cigarette I go nuts. If I don’t have marijuana it’s no big deal. But everywhere I travel everybody offers me marijuana. 
Response: Well, here’s the thing: I knew from the beginning that I didn’t want to use the word. Not that I don’t value the word. I think it’s a tragedy that we don’t use it. But we live in a visual age, we live in a syntax of visualization. One would see more images in one day today than a person in the Middle Ages would in their entire lifetime. So we’re swimming in images. It’s hard to escape them. So I knew that I wanted music. Now, why music? I could have chosen Mozart or Bach, one of my favorites: The Baroque form, the early form, a transition from the Middle Ages and the Dies Irae and all of that. But I wanted an original composer. So I asked Marcia Mikulak, herself a composer and a pianist, to give me a tutorial for about a month about the living composers who I might be able to collaborate with. And I heard a lot of people actually: I heard Ligeti, I heard Stockhausen—who moved me greatly—I heard Reich—separate from Glass—I heard Tomita—who was doing electronic music, as Stockhausen was in Germany—and then I heard Philip Glass. I heard a piece he composed called North Star which was used on a documentary by Mark di Suvero, the artist. I fell in love with the music immediately for the following reason: I felt it was non-directive. I felt it was not conscious of itself. I felt it operated in two zones, just like your subconscious does. I felt that as a narrative, with the distance it created from the subject, it gave the perfect verb in terms of what one heard, to the object. It was the perfect play for me. His music has the possibility of 100 beats per minute. It’s not the 12-scale form. It’s a form that’s ever-ascending but never getting there. It goes directly to the soul of the listener. It doesn’t proceed through metaphor. It’s speaking to your subconscious. Everyone sees a different picture. Everyone hears a different sound. Philip Glass was a blessing.
Response: Well, I wrote him letters. I sent telexes. Or whatever it was. Through some gizmo where you type and it comes on a string. I visited New York. Left things under his door. And he was at that point finishing Einstein on the Beach and driving a taxicab to support himself. 
Response: No. The event that he created with Robert Wilson catapulted him into fame. It became one of those huge events of 20th-century art immediately. With the timing, with restructuring the form of opera, because it had a lot of negative criticism from the authority, but huge insight from others. And a big huge public response. He became famous with one show.
Response: It was in the beginning. We had already shot stuff in Four Corners which we were very happy with. And I had shot in St. Louis with the buildings coming down, although we didn’t shoot those, we shot ‘em before they got down, and acquired the demolition footage. We were doing a 16 mm film for 40 minutes, and we were so pleased with what we had that our backer allowed us to go full bore for a longer feature in 35 mm, which would give more visual impact to the image. So all of that was in play and Philip finally saw me in ’77 because of two friends: Rudy Wurlitzer and Jeffrey Lew. They were uprating me in different channels. Rudy Wurlitzer is very well known, he’s from the Wurlitzer jukebox family and he’s also a very close associate and collaborator with Robert Frank. And is a superfine screenwriter. So he got Philip to see me, just to get me off of Philip’s back. And my dear friend Jeffrey Lew, who started 112 Greene Street where all the famous people of the 70s came out for his art—Philip’s first studio was there. Jeffrey is a very controversial figure, considers himself a god blessed sociopath. I had a screening at Jonas Mekas’ Quality Film Archives which was in Soho on Wooster back in the day. Philip came, I showed him footage from Four Corners that we had been doing. First I played Mussorgsky’s Pictures at an Exhibition because I thought it was the most brilliant composition, and rendered by Mussorgsky it was like genius work. Because I wanted to have an apt contender in the ring, with whom I considered the master. And then I played Philip’s music for North Star and said, “Well Philip, which do you think is the best?” And he said, “Well of course I think mine is. When may we start?” So it was a perfect con job of the subconscious. I’m so happy that we’ve now been partners for 45 years. He’s my only partner in music. I’m his longest partner of anything he’s ever done. He’ll be 85 and I’ll be 82 in a month or so. And we’re doing a project together right now. 
Response: It’s called NEO NOW. It’s been nine years in the making. My films take forever because nobody wants to do a burnt offering except for very few people. Because I can’t offer them the clarity of what I’m doing, but only the clarity of the intention of what I wish to discover. If I knew what I was doing before I was doing it then it wouldn’t be the project that I wanna do. The film is five little mini-films. Stephen Soderbergh and Alexander Rodnyansky from Moscow are the presenters and executive producers. 
Response: On two other projects, yes. He’s our angel. He dumped a good bit of money on me and said, “make a film.” It wasn’t as much as I wanted. I said, “I can’t do it, but give me a day to think about it.” An hour later I said, “I’ll take what you give me, I had a thought.” Boom boom. So we’re making five little mini-films. They’re all about the catastrophe happening now to the world’s children, the world they live in. They’re not of the future, they are the future. So we’re making a film with kids for all audiences. And we’re doing so in a non-spoken manner, but a very articulate manner. Body language, facial expression, eye behavior, gesture. All these kids are not actors, we want only authentic responses and we know how to do that. We operate on a stage 200 feet wide, 100 feet deep, 100 feet high. And we do it all with a little gizmo, not for the big stage, because it’s the little gizmo that everyone is glued to. All the kids of the world, they’re allured, they’re addicted, bought and sold literally. Because kids these days see more than kids have ever seen. These machines are babysitting them to fucking death, okay? So it’s made for that machine, and it gives them a story that is linear and non-linear at the same time. It’s like going to a giant freak show with the big calliope in the middle which we always have going. You’ll just have to see. For me, it’s like trying to tell you what my beatific visions are like.
Response: When I was about four years old. It was a behavioral problem. I was one of four members in the family, the middle one, and I flunked kindergarten. Wasted time, annoyed others, couldn’t sit still, kinetic. My daddy worked, but that meant he went to bars every day to do his work as an insurance salesman, speaking Cajun and all. And he taught me to perform and to dance. I was like his monkey getting money. I loved him. He taught me poetry. He taught me the boogie-woogie. Look that up sometime. I saw things that little kids wouldn’t normally see. And then I saw how Black people were being treated everywhere. I didn’t trust what was going on, or the answers that I was getting from anybody, including my daddy and mommy, who I loved. So I made a treehouse and lived in it outside with my big friend Bobby Da Silva. We were little hoods. We’d go rob. My dad was an alcoholic—he wanted me to put the car in the back so we wouldn’t bang the houses next to us. I had daddy’s coat, so we’d take off at 10 and 12 years old in the car. I was able to penetrate the wealthy in New Orleans society by being a pretty boy and hustling and conning my way in. I could dance so I could get in anywhere. And then I decided to get rid of it all and I left all of that. It was like leading to nowhere.
Response: Like any young person, you want to be like the person you most admire. So when I was in the 7th grade, Christian Brothers were sent to teach at St. Mike’s because the Sisters weren’t doing that well with the boys (we were segregated). And here were these generous people. Who were joyful. Who were giving. Who were not conflicted. Who were willing to spend time with you, listen to you. So I wanted to be like them. I had no idea what I was getting into at all. My mother didn’t want me to go. My father said, “let him go! He has to do what he has to do.” So I can’t thank my pop enough. I bless my mama. She never understood but was eventually happy (until I got thrown out of the Order and then she almost had a collapse). When I joined the Brothers it was like going from la dolce vita New Orleans to the Middle Ages. I had no idea what I was getting into. Like most things, you don’t know how you got there but that’s not important. I was there. So I followed the rules. I became a monk at 14. 
Response: Well, it wasn’t film that I thought I could approach it in. As a Christian Brother, I was sent to teach in Santa Fe, New Mexico. They didn’t want me to go to Louisiana because they knew I would get into trouble with Civil Rights and all that, so they kept me in Santa Fe. All Brothers take not only vows of poverty, chastity, obedience, they take the vow to teach the poor gratuitously. We weren’t teaching, we had a few kids in the school, like token kids. There was a whole world of poor kids not in school, in gangs. So to make a long story short I drove my superiors crazy. They finally let me teach and I was a prefect for the seniors who were there as boarding school kids from Mexico. I was a teacher—seventh, eighth, all the way through senior high, and they gave me permission to work with street gangs as well. So I went out and organized street gangs, not as a social worker, but as someone who would organize a family. So that they could empower themselves. The context of the world they lived in, not Me! Me! Me! but Us! Us! Us! That we are the other person. I challenged them and we became a threat to society, because we became organized, and we would follow police around so they wouldn’t brutalize. At times there were even shootouts and people got hurt, some killed. It was a very intense time. There’s a lot to talk about but it would take up too much of your time and my breath. I don’t know if I can say any more about it. But that led me to see the film Los Olvidados by Luis Buñuel. It was like a spiritual experience for me. Not an entertainment. I couldn’t do what the master did, but I showed this to kids on the wall of the barrio in a reduced 16mm version. It became church and I knew that I wanted to make film, that could touch people. It could be sacramental. It didn’t have to be entertaining or clever. It could be soulful, of the soul. So I found a medium working with those kids, and it was to make film. 
Response: I’ll tell you how it works: think of a regular film that’s a narrative film. Any subject you want. Love, hate, jealousy, happiness, sadness, whatever. Let’s say the leading lady is Marilyn Monroe to be extreme, to make the point. Do you know how much attention they give to that person and not to the background? They give a little background shot, but it’s the person because that’s the star. 
Response: The hero of the films is who I call the genius loci. Every location has a genius loci. It has a memory. It has a presence. It’s filmable. You can light it by the sun. It’s visible to the whole world, and because it’s so fucking familiar nobody sees it. You know where I’m coming from? 
Response: “That which is most present is least seen.” I’m not the first to say that. That which is closest to us is that which we don’t pay attention to. So I’m trying to say “Look! Look at the building!” If you arrived here from another planet—which we all did, we’re off-planet joiners now—we don’t live using technology, we are technology. Everything is involved in the environment of technology. Being sensate we become the environment. It’s not by accident that we have two eyes, a nose, a mouth, and ears, but in the world we’re living in we’re going to have diodes and 104 trace elements that never were in nature 110 years ago in our bodies. And our doctors telling us how they’re going to splice and redesign us and make money on us, and the metaverse that the crooks are now developing to scheme us out because they’ve already destroyed the world we live in. Now does that sound extreme to you? I hope so. Am I raving? Yes. It’s time to rave. You know “every wall has a door,” someone said. Someone else said, "A Dawn Without A Day." So we’re in "A Dawn" without "A Day," and every wall has a door. What we know is so little compared to what we don’t know. So it’s time to be heroic, it’s time to resist destiny. 
Response: I made a list of them. They are the presence of modernity. They’re buildings. They’re food. They’re animals. They’re pedestrians. They’re automobiles. They’re monuments. They’re patriotism. There’s the sick. There’s homeless. There’s the wealthy. All the accoutrements of life that we take as normal: the news, the media, the images of modernity all over the planet. The way we get it through oil and what we take to get that which is hidden in plain sight. The bomb. The military to protect it all. We go to the moon not to go to the moon but to bring the moon to the earth through technology. So it’s all one. You could call it a nihilistic point of view, but we’re beyond that. This is the ability to be hopeless. Humpty Dumpty possessed the courage to be hopeful about recreating another world. Does that sound idealistic? You bet. The most practical thing today is to be idealistic. 
Response: No, he did on all the films. Not as much as I and the crew did, because we stayed for months, but he came for a month in South America (for Powaqqatsi), he came back for Serra Pelada. He was a player. He wanted to see. I like that about him. He gets involved. He’s not just writing some tunes and hoping they’ll float. He wants equity. To give balance, to give love to the image, to the visual that he’s going to relate to. 
Response: Not so much, but Philip would go on as many locations as his time would permit. He’s been where we filmed gorillas in zoos, in swamps in Louisiana, in abandoned buildings all over the place. Sometimes that happens, and we make selects. He wants the feeling of what we’re doing. Not telling me at this point what to do. He’s accepting that I’m offering him something to write with original feeling. He likes to be there. Then he comes to the studio where everybody loves to see him and he’ll see the selects with me. I can dramaturgically shape scenes for him and the whole crew and see what he responds to. 
Response: Let me give you a little background: it’s one of the oldest pieces of music ever written, that’s continued to this day. It’s from the 11th century. It’s the Dies Irae, from the Office for the Dead. Done for a capella voice, both male and female. Usually separately. It’s used by people like Kubrick, it’s used by Lucas, it’s used by the Lord of the Rings. It’s used by Hitchcock. It’s used by Renoir. And it was Philip Glass’s first set of notes. The four magic notes of the Dies Irae are the things that Philip learned when he went to Paris to learn to work with [Nadia] Boulanger. That’s what he was trained on—those four notes. When I was 14, I had been humming and singing the Dies Irae ever since. It’s my baptismal tune into the world, but not of it.
Response: Yes, with the Brothers. I lived in a religious community of 120 monks. We would sing every day, the mass of the day. So that was the mass of the dead. And we always had people dying. [Laughs]
Response: It’s actually a celebration of life. It’s for the living, not the dead. Their life is living in us. It’s a communal piece. But it also houses mystery. And that’s why people like Kubrick used it. If you go to the beginning of The Shining when the car is coming into the Colorado snowdrift monstrosity hotel, Gothic, with all the ghosts, they’re playing another version of the Dies Irae, and remarkably we have a version like that also in the new film NEO NOW, with just a calliope and a foghorn. It’s a classic piece. 
Response: He gives temporal values, emotive values, timings for connecting it all together, and for Koyaanisqatsi he had 13 discrete parts that feel like parts of the body, all part of one body. “Okay, I’ll start on number three.” So it’s his freedom. I don’t tell him what to write, but he has all of the material to respond to. Philip is the first person—except for a few close associates in Santa Fe—I’ll talk to. He’s the only person who’s been on all the projects other than my group in Santa Fe. (With Michael Riesman, I might add, as conductor. A fantastic player.) Philip is the first person I share the ideas with because these projects usually take at least five to seven years (in the case of NEO NOW, nine years) to get the money. There are a lot of conversations sleeping on Philip’s floor, or in the kitchen, or in the basement, or up in the kids' rooms if they’re not there. A lot of time to talk. Philip has the uncanny capacity to listen. To pay attention. He’s insightful. He’s amazing to me. I don’t want to toot his horn too much, I don’t want to embarrass him. But he figures out the words between the words I use, to give them valence. To give them authenticity. To bring closer focus to what they are. To work with him is a dream. Both him and myself, we both have rather large egos. If my ego is large it’s Brooklyn. If his is large, it’s Manhattan. Gigantic. However, let me say that there’s not a bit of vanity in Philip’s ego. And mine I wouldn’t know what it was. I look like a drug addict most of the time. And I am! I gave that up a long time ago. It’s not about how I look. It’s how I act. Philip wants to know what I think. He wants to know if I like it. Well, I only can think for one person: myself. Or maybe the three or four that I happen to be. But no more than that. I have to use my emotive index, the limits that I have, or the judgment that I use. So I’ll say, “Gee, this is beautiful but I can’t use it.” I’ve done that for every project so far, and he’s taken it graciously. Perhaps my favorite piece that Philip Glass has ever written, perhaps—close to it, if not—is a piece I rejected for Koyaanisqatsi.
Response: It isn’t that it wasn’t beautiful, it just didn’t fit the liturgy, if I can use that word. The rituals, the spells, and incantations that were flowing out of Philip for Koyaanisqatsi. So I gave that to him. I got to use it in a little film called Evidence that I did. It’s one of his most famous pieces. And I’m using it now in Act 2 of this NEO NOW project. See, you take the music as you take the image, put another frame around it, and it has another voice altogether. So to work with Philip is a blessing. I’ve only worked with him. To be clear, I think I could’ve worked with other people—at least other people wished to work with me, and I would’ve liked that, but I only have a limited life, and I felt there was so much to constantly explore with Philip that I felt lucky to stay with him. Given his age and mine—he being a yogi, standing on his head, healthy and all—and me smoking, drinking, blah, blah, blah, he’ll probably outlive me by a score, but he’s the guy that I want to row the boat with as I go over the falls.

